# 1.11 [Optionals](https://developer.apple.com/library/content/documentation/Swift/Conceptual/Swift_Programming_Language/TheBasics.html#//apple_ref/doc/uid/TP40014097-CH5-ID330)

Optionals are a Swift specific (i.e Objective-C and C don't have equivalents) data type, which can take two values. Either an optional is **set** or it is **not set** (which is represented programatically as a value of `nil`).

The example below is an example of a time when optionals are useful: when trying to convert a string to an integer. Obviously however, not all strings can be converted to ints (`"123"` can, `"I like pie"` cannot):

```Swift
let possibleNumber = "123"
let convertedNumber = Int(possibleNumber)
// convertedNumber is inferred to be of type "Int?", or "optional Int"
```
An optional Int has a type of `Int?`, where the question mark indicates that the type is Optional. This symbolism holds for other optional types as well, e.g. `String?`.

### `nil`

You can also explicitly set optionals to valueless states by assigning them to `nil`. Note that the type must explicitly be declared as Optional.
```Swift
var serverResponseCode: Int? = 404
// serverResponseCode contains an actual Int value of 404
serverResponseCode = nil
// serverResponseCode now contains no value
```

When you define an optional variable without providing an initial value it is automatically set to `nil`:

```Swift
var surveyAnswer: String?
// surveyAnswer is automatically set to nil
```

### If Statements and Forced Unwrapping

You can use an `if` statement to tell if an optional contains a value by comparing the value against `nil`:
```Swift
if convertedNumber != nil {
    print("convertedNumber contains some integer value.")
}
// Prints "convertedNumber contains some integer value."
```

Once you're sure the Optional contains a value, you can access it by adding an exclamation point (!) to the end. This is called *forced unwrapping*. e.g.:
```Swift
if convertedNumber != nil {
    print("convertedNumber has an integer value of \(convertedNumber!).")
}
// Prints "convertedNumber has an integer value of 123."
```

### Optional Binding
*Optional Binding* is a technique to check if an optional has a value, and *if so*, make it available as a named variable. This technique is possible with both `if` and `while` statements.

The syntax for this looks as follows:
```Swift
if let constantName = someOptional {
    //statements using constantName
}
```
A more detailed example that reproduces the previous code might look like:
```Swift
if let actualNumber = Int(possibleNumber) {
    print("\"\(possibleNumber)\" has an integer value of \(actualNumber)")
} else {
    print("\"\(possibleNumber)\" could not be converted to an integer")
}
// Prints ""123" has an integer value of 123"
```

This could be read as:
> “If the optional Int returned by Int(possibleNumber) contains a value, set a new constant called actualNumber to the value contained in the optional.” 

Note that you can use both `let` and `var` when doing optional binding. Use var if you intend to mutate the optional

You can also include as many optional bindings in a single if statement as you like, seperated by commas. If any optionals are set to `nil` the whole statement evaluates to `false`. For example, the following two if statements are equivalent:


```Swift
if let firstNumber = Int("4"), let secondNumber = Int("42"), firstNumber < secondNumber && secondNumber < 100 {
    print("\(firstNumber) < \(secondNumber) < 100")
}
// Prints "4 < 42 < 100"
 
if let firstNumber = Int("4") {
    if let secondNumber = Int("42") {
        if firstNumber < secondNumber && secondNumber < 100 {
            print("\(firstNumber) < \(secondNumber) < 100")
        }
    }
}
// Prints "4 < 42 < 100"
```

### Implicitly Unwrapped Optionals

Up to this point, all the optionals we have been dealing with have been allowed to have 'no value'. These can be unwrapped using the methods described above.

However, what we occasionally find is that some optionals will *always* have a value after they are first set. In these cases, we can remove the need to do the above checks. This is done by placing an exclamation point (`String!`) rather than a question mark (`String?`) after the type you wish to make optional. 

These kind of optionals are called *implicitly unwrapped optionals*. They are most often used during Class Initialiazation.

Implicitly unwrapped optionals act as optionals behind the scenes, but can be used as normal variables the rest of the time, e.g:

```Swift
let possibleString: String? = "An optional string."
let forcedString: String = possibleString! // requires an exclamation mark
 
let assumedString: String! = "An implicitly unwrapped optional string."
let implicitString: String = assumedString // no need for an exclamation mark
```

Basically, you can think of it as an optional that you give your program permission to unwrap every time it is used.

Note that if an implicit unwrapped optional is set to nil, it will trigger a runtime error, just as unwrapping a normal optional set to nil would.

You can still treat an implicitly unwrapped optional like a normal optional, to check if it contains a value:

```Swift
if assumedString != nil {
    print(assumedString)
}
// Prints "An implicitly unwrapped optional string."
```
You can also use an implicitly unwrapped optional with optional binding, to check and unwrap its value in a single statement:
```Swift
if let definiteString = assumedString {
    print(definiteString)
}
// Prints "An implicitly unwrapped optional string."
```

[Previous Note](../1%20-%20The%20Basics/1.10%20-%20Booleans.md) | [Back To Contents](https://github.com/Firanus/swift-language-guide-notes) |  [Next Note](../1%20-%20The%20Basics/1.12%20-%20Error%20Handling.md)