# 1.13 [Assertions and Preconditions](https://developer.apple.com/library/content/documentation/Swift/Conceptual/Swift_Programming_Language/TheBasics.html#//apple_ref/doc/uid/TP40014097-CH5-ID335)

Assertions and Preconditions are both checks that happen at runtime. They allow you to check essential conditions before evaluating any additional code. If a `Boolean` condition in the assertion or precondition evaluates to `true`, code execution continues as normal. If it evaluates to `false`, the code stops immediately.

Assertions and Preconditions serve as useful tools for documenting your code and improving your debugging. Unlike errors, they aren't intended for use in cases where your code can recover.

The difference between the two is that **assertions** are *only checked during debug builds*, whereas **preconditions** are checked in *both debug and production builds*.

## Debugging with Assertions

Assertions can be used by calling the `assert(_:_:file:line:)` function. The variables are:
1. The `Boolean` condition to be evaluated
2. The (optional) message to display if the assertion returns false. If this is omitted, the condition to be tested is returned as prose.

e.g.
```Swift
let age = -3
assert(age >= 0, "A person's age can't be less than zero.")
// This assertion fails because -3 is not >= 0.
```

If the condition is alread checked, you can use the `assertionFailure(_:file:line:)` function to indicate that an assertion has failed:

```Swift
if age > 10 {
    print("You can ride the roller-coaster or the ferris wheel.")
} else if age > 0 {
    print("You can ride the ferris wheel.")
} else {
    assertionFailure("A person's age can't be less than zero.")
}
```

## Enforcing Preconditions

Use preconditions when a boolean condition *can* be false, but *must* be true for your program to continue.

As with assertions, there is a `precondition(_:_:file:line:)` function that takes a condition and a message, and a `preconditionFailure(_:file:line:)` function that takes a message to use if the condition is already checked. e.g.

```Swift
// In the implementation of a subscript...
precondition(index > 0, "Index must be greater than zero.")
```

Note that there is a compilation mode (-Ounchecked) that doesn't check preconditions. If you need something to fail even in these cases, use the `fatalError(_:file:line:)` function, which takes a message. A suitable use case would be when stubbing functionality that hasn't yet been implemented.
[Previous Note](https://github.com/Firanus/swift-language-guide-notes/blob/master/1%20-%20The%20Basics/1.12%20-%20Error%20Handling.md) | [Back To Contents](https://github.com/Firanus/swift-language-guide-notes) |  [Next Section](https://github.com/Firanus/swift-language-guide-notes/blob/master/2%20-%20Basic%20Operators/2.0%20-%20Basic%20Operators.md)