# 10.0 - [Inheritance](https://developer.apple.com/library/content/documentation/Swift/Conceptual/Swift_Programming_Language/Inheritance.html)

In Swift, inheritance is one of the key mechanice that seperates classes from other types.

Note that in Swift, classes do not inherit from a universal base class. As a result, any class you define without a superclass is itself immediately a base class you can build upon.

You indicate that a class is a subclass by using the following `:` syntax:
```Swift
class SomeSubclass: SomeSuperclass {
    // subclass definition goes here
}
```

## Overriding

As in other languages, in Swift a subclass can override its superclass's methods and properties. In addition, you can override property observers, and property getters and setters. However, to avoid accidental overrides, Swift requires you to use the `override` keyword when doing so (otherwise the compiler throws an error). 

In the example below, the Train class overrides the Vehicle superclass's default makeNoise function.
```Swift
class Vehicle {
    var currentSpeed = 0.0
    var description: String {
        return "traveling at \(currentSpeed) miles per hour"
    }
    func makeNoise() {
        // do nothing - an arbitrary vehicle doesn't necessarily make a noise
    }
}

class Train: Vehicle {
    override func makeNoise() {
        print("Choo Choo")
    }
}
```

If, during your override, you want to access the superclass's functionality, this can be done using the `super` keyword, as in other languages. e.g. calling `super.superclassMethod()`

## Preventing Overrides

To prevent a method, property, or subscript from being overridden by a subclass, you can use the `final` keyword before the method, property, or subscript's introducer keyword (e.g. `final var`, `final func`, `final class func`, and `final subscript`).

You can also mark whole classes as `final`, to prevent them being subclassed. Any attempt to do so will result in a compile time error.

[Previous Section](../9%20-%20Methods/9.1%20-%20Instance%20Methods.md) | [Back To Contents](https://github.com/Firanus/swift-language-guide-notes) |  [Next Section](../11%20-%20Initialization/11.0%20-%20Initialization.md)