# 9.1 [Instance Methods](https://developer.apple.com/library/content/documentation/Swift/Conceptual/Swift_Programming_Language/Methods.html#//apple_ref/doc/uid/TP40014097-CH15-ID235)

These are methods defined against an instance of a class, structure or enumeration.

## `self`

Swift uses the `self` keyword to refer to the properties and methods of the current instance of the class. This allows the current instance to access its own properties and methods.

Note that you don't often have to use this keyword. By default, when you use the name of an instance property, Swift will assume it is the one associated with the current instance. It is only really necessary when there is scope for ambiguity, as below (where there is both a method parameter and an instance property called `x`):

```Swift
struct Point {
    var x = 0.0, y = 0.0
    func isToTheRightOf(x: Double) -> Bool {
        return self.x > x
    }
}
```

## Modifying Value Types from Within Instance Methods

Structures and Enumerations are both value types. By default, *the properties of a value type cannot be modified from within its instance methods*.

You can, however, opt into that behaviour for specific methods attached to structures and enumerations by using the `mutating` keyword. These methods can reassign properties and even assign a completely new instance to the implicit `self` property.

For example:
```Swift
struct Point {
    var x = 0.0, y = 0.0
    mutating func moveBy(x deltaX: Double, y deltaY: Double) {
        x += deltaX
        y += deltaY
    }
}
var somePoint = Point(x: 1.0, y: 1.0)
somePoint.moveBy(x: 2.0, y: 3.0)
print("The point is now at (\(somePoint.x), \(somePoint.y))")
// Prints "The point is now at (3.0, 4.0)"
```

Note that if you define a structure as a constant (i.e. using the `let` keyword), you cannot then use mutating methods on it.

## Assigning to self Within a Mutating Method

As previously mentioned, mutating methods can assign `self` to entirely new instances of the type, as in the example below, which is functionally identical to the previous example:
```Swift
struct Point {
    var x = 0.0, y = 0.0
    mutating func moveBy(x deltaX: Double, y deltaY: Double) {
        self = Point(x: x + deltaX, y: y + deltaY)
    }
}
```

[Previous Section](../9%20-%20Methods/9.0%20-%20Methods.md) | [Back To Contents](https://github.com/Firanus/swift-language-guide-notes) |  [Next Note](../10%20-%20Inheritance/10.0%20-%2020Inheritance.md)