# 20.0 [Type Casting](https://developer.apple.com/library/content/documentation/Swift/Conceptual/Swift_Programming_Language/TypeCasting.html)

Type casting is a way to either check the type of an instance or to treat the instance as a different superclass or subclass in its class heirarchy. In Swift, these two operations are implemented with the `is` and `as` keywords respectively.

For the remainder of this note, we will use a simple class heirarchy with a superclass of `MediaItem`, two seperate subclasses `Movie` and `Song`, and a `library` of MediaItems:

```Swift
class MediaItem {
  var name: String
  //...definition of MediaItem
}

class Movie: MediaItem {
  var director: String
  //...definition of Movie
}
class Song: MediaItem {
  var artist: String
  //...definition of Song
}

var library: [MediaItem] = [//... collection of songs and movies]
```

## Type Checking

To check whether an instance is of a certain subclass type, we can use the `is` keyword. For example, to check if a particularly item in `library` is a `Song`, we could write:

```Swift
for media in library {
  if media is Song {
    print("We got a song.")
  } else {
    print("Not a song. Either a movie or a plain old MediaType")
  }
}
```

## Downcasting

An instance of a particular class type in Swift can, behind the scenes, actually be an instance of a subclass type. Swift provides a downcasting operator to allow you to downcast your type in these scenarios. This also works if you want to cast a type to a `protocol` it implements.

However, downcasting can fail, so Swift provides the user with two forms of the operator:
* `as?` always returns an Optional. If the downcasting operation fails, the variable will be set to `nil`. Thus it is the safer of the two operations.
* `as!` attempts to downcast the result and then force-unwrap it as a single compound action. If it fails, it will trigger a runtime error, so only use it if you are certain it will succeed.

The example below makes use of `as?` to try to print out a media-specific message:

```Swift
for item in library {
    if let movie = item as? Movie {
        print("Movie: \(movie.name), dir. \(movie.director)")
    } else if let song = item as? Song {
        print("Song: \(song.name), by \(song.artist)")
    }
}
```

Note that downcasting does not actually change the type of the instance it is accessing. It simply treats it as a different type.

## Type Casting for `Any` and `AnyObject`

Swift provides two special types for working with nonspecific types:

* `Any` can represent an instance of any type at all, including function types.

* `AnyObject` can represent an instance of any class type.

Note that you cannot invoke methods on objects of type `Any`, as Swift does not know what the underlying class is. Thus doing so requires using type casting via the `as` keyword.

```Swift
let unknown: Any = //... something
if let foo = unknown as? MyType {
  //... foo is of type MyType here, so we can access Mytype methods and properties
} else {
  //... foo could not be cast as MyType
}
```

These types have been provided to allow backwards compatability with Objective C (which had a very important type name `id`), and as a result, should be avoided by the user whenever possible.

Swift is strongly typed, and works best when this is embraced. Almost all possible use cases of `Any` that do not involve Objective C backwards compatability would be better served using an `enum`.

[Previous Section](../19%20-%20Error%20Handling/19.0%20-%20Error%20Handling.md) | [Back To Contents](https://github.com/Firanus/swift-language-guide-notes)