# 4.1 [Arrays](https://developer.apple.com/library/content/documentation/Swift/Conceptual/Swift_Programming_Language/CollectionTypes.html#//apple_ref/doc/uid/TP40014097-CH8-ID107)

Arrays in Swift share similarities with arrays in most other languages. In this note we will focus on things that are a little more Swift specific.

Arrays have two equivalent forms of notation:
* `Array<Element>` - longhand
* `[Element]` - shorthand

## Creating an Empty Array

If you want to create a new empty array of a specific type, you can of course use the longhand notation. However, there is also a shorthand option; `[Element]()` will create an empty array of type `Element`.

Alternatively, if you want to set an existing array with a given type to empty, you can just use the empty array syntax `[]`:
```Swift
someInts.append(3)
// someInts now contains 1 value of type Int
someInts = []
// someInts is now an empty array, but is still of type [Int]
```

## Creating an Array with a default value

Swift's `Array` type provides an initializer for setting up arrays of a certain size with all their values set to the same default value. The syntax is:

```Swift
var threeDoubles = Array(repeating: 0.0, count: 3)
// threeDoubles is of type [Double], and equals [0.0, 0.0, 0.0]
```

## `isEmpty` property

Arrays possess a shorthand property for checking if their count is 0, the `isEmpty` property. This is either `true` or `false`.

## `removeLast` method

If you want to remove the last item of an array, it is preferable to use `removeLast()` rather than `remove(at:)` to avoid querying the array's count.

## Range-based alteration

You can edit a range of items at once in an array using the range operators. Note that the the replacement set of values does *not* need to have the same length as the set of values they are replacing. e.g:

```Swift
//shoppingList currently contains 7 items
shoppingList[4...6] = ["Bananas", "Apples"]
// shoppingList now contains 6 items
```

## Iterating over an Array

This can be done using a `for-in` loop:

```Swift
for item in shoppingList {
    print(item)
}
// Six eggs
// Milk
// Flour
// Baking Powder
// Bananas
```

If you want the index, you can use the `enumerated` array method, which returns an array of tuples which contain the item index and value:

```Swift
for (index, value) in shoppingList.enumerated() {
    print("Item \(index + 1): \(value)")
}
// Item 1: Six eggs
// Item 2: Milk
// Item 3: Flour
// Item 4: Baking Powder
// Item 5: Bananas
```

[Previous Note](../4%20-%20Collection%20Types/4.0%20-%20Collection%20Types.md) | [Back To Contents](https://github.com/Firanus/swift-language-guide-notes) |  [Next Note](../4%20-%20Collection%20Types/4.2%20-%20Dictionaries.md)