# 4.3 [Sets](https://developer.apple.com/library/content/documentation/Swift/Conceptual/Swift_Programming_Language/CollectionTypes.html#//apple_ref/doc/uid/TP40014097-CH8-ID484)

A *set* stores distonct values of the same type in a collection with no distinct ordering. Sets can be used in place of arrays when:
* The order of items is not important
* When you need to ensure an item appears only once.

## Hash Values for Sets

A type must be *hashable* in order to be stored in a set. This means that it must provide a way to compute a hash value for itself. A hash value is an `Int` value that's the same for all values that compare equality, such that, if `a == b`, it must follow that `a.hashvalue == b.hashvalue`

All of Swift's basic types (`Int`, `String`, `Double`, `Bool` etc.) are hashable by default, and can be used as set value types. This is also true for Enumeration case values without associated data.

You can make your own custom types `Hashable` by making them conform to the `Hashable` protocol. As the Hashable protocal inherits from `Equatable`, it must also conform to this. Details of how to do this are provided in the Swift Documentation for [Hashable](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/swift/hashable) and [Equatable](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/swift/equatable).

## Creating and Initializing Sets

You can create an empty set using the initializer syntax:

```Swift
var letters = Set<Character>()
print("letters is of type Set<Character> with \(letters.count) items.")
// Prints "letters is of type Set<Character> with 0 items."
```

Note that, unlike arrays and dictionaries, sets **do not have an equivalent shorthand syntax**. However, the array syntax can be substituted in various ways. For instance, if you have already provided the set with type information, you can create an empty set using an empty array literal, `[]`:

```Swift
letters.insert("a")
// letters now contains 1 value of type Character
letters = []
// letters is now an empty set, but is still of type Set<Character>
```

You can also initialize a set with an array literal, as in:

```Swift
var favoriteGenres: Set<String> = ["Rock", "Classical", "Hip hop"]
// favoriteGenres has been initialized with three initial items
```

Note that we needed the `:Set` type declaration to be made explicitly because without it, type inference would assume an array. However, we could have omitted the `<String>` portion, as Swift can recognise that it will be a set of strings. In other words, the following is valid:

```Swift
var favoriteGenres: Set = ["Rock", "Classical", "Hip hop"]
```

## Accessing and Modifying a Set

Sets provide a standard set of methods and properties allowing the user to access and modify them. These include:
* `count` - an integer property to find the number of items in a set
* `isEmpty` - a boolean property which tells you if a set contains 0 elements
* `insert(_:)` - a method to add an item to a set
* `remove(_:)` - This removes an item from the set and returns it if it's a member of the set, and returns `nil` if it is not.
* `removeAll()` - This removes all the members of a set.

## Iterating Over a Set

You can iterate over a set using a standard `for-in` loop. Note however that sets do not have a defined ordering. If you want the values in a specific order, you can use the `sorted()` method, which returns the sets elements as an array sorted using the `<` operator:

```Swift
for genre in favoriteGenres.sorted() {
    print("\(genre)")
}
// Classical
// Hip hop
// Jazz
```

[Previous Note](../4%20-%20Collection%20Types/4.2%20-%20Dictionaries.md) | [Back To Contents](https://github.com/Firanus/swift-language-guide-notes) |  [Next Section](../4%20-%20Collection%20Types/4.4%20-%20Performing%20Set%20Operations.md)