# 7.1 [Comparing Classes and Structures](https://developer.apple.com/library/content/documentation/Swift/Conceptual/Swift_Programming_Language/ClassesAndStructures.html#//apple_ref/doc/uid/TP40014097-CH13-ID83")

Classes and Structures have a great deal in common. Both can:

* Define properties to store values
* Define methods to provide functionality
* Define subscripts to provide access to their values using subscript syntax
* Define initializers to set up their initial state
* Be extended to expand their functionality beyond a default implementation
* Conform to protocols to provide standard functionality of a certain kind

For information on these features, please search the specific section.

Classes however, have functionality that Structures do not, namely:

* Inheritance enables one class to inherit the characteristics of another.
* Type casting enables you to check and interpret the type of a class instance at runtime.
* Deinitializers enable an instance of a class to free up any resources it has assigned.
* Reference counting allows more than one reference to a class instance.

These are all advanced features. Please see the relevant sections for them.

## Definition Syntax

Classes and Structures are defined in an analogous way to C-based languages, using the `struct` and `class` keywords:

```Swift
struct Resolution {
    var width = 0
    var height = 0
}
class VideoMode {
    var resolution = Resolution()
    var interlaced = false
    var frameRate = 0.0
    var name: String?
}
```

## Class and Structure Instances

Classes and Structures are instantiated in the same way:

```Swift
let someResolution = Resolution()
let someVideoMode = VideoMode()
```

## Accessing Properties

Both classes and structures use a simple dot-based (`class.property`) based syntax to access properties and subproperties:

```Swift
print("The width of someResolution is \(someResolution.width)")
// Prints "The width of someResolution is 0"

print("The width of someVideoMode is \(someVideoMode.resolution.width)")
// Prints "The width of someVideoMode is 0"
```

## Memberwise Initializers for Structure Types

**Structures**, and only structures, receive an automatically-generated *memberwise initializer* which you can use to initialise properties.

```Swift
let vga = Resolution(width: 640, height: 480)
```

[Previous Note](../7%20-%20Classes%20and%20Structures/7.0%20-%20Classes%20and%20Structures.md) | [Back To Contents](https://github.com/Firanus/swift-language-guide-notes) |  [Next Note](../7%20-%20Classes%20and%20Structures/7.2%20-%20Structures%20and%20Enumerations%20are%20Value%20Types.md)