# 7.3 [Classes are Reference Types](https://developer.apple.com/library/content/documentation/Swift/Conceptual/Swift_Programming_Language/ClassesAndStructures.html#//apple_ref/doc/uid/TP40014097-CH13-ID89)

Unlike value types, reference types are not copied when they are assigned to a variable or constant, or when they are passed to a function. Rather than a copy, a reference to the same existing instance is used instead.

For example:
```Swift
let tenEighty = VideoMode()
tenEighty.resolution = hd
tenEighty.interlaced = true
tenEighty.name = "1080i"
tenEighty.frameRate = 25.0

let alsoTenEighty = tenEighty
alsoTenEighty.frameRate = 30.0

print("The frameRate property of tenEighty is now \(tenEighty.frameRate)")
// Prints "The frameRate property of tenEighty is now 30.0"
```

Note also that both the classes above have been declared as **constants**, but their properties are still changeable. This is because what let has made constant is not the data within the class, but the reference pointing to the class.

## Identity Operators

Because two reference types can point to the same single instance behind the scenes, Swift gives us the `===` and `!==` operators to test whether two classes are identical (or not identical):

```Swift
if tenEighty === alsoTenEighty {
    print("tenEighty and alsoTenEighty refer to the same VideoMode instance.")
}
// Prints "tenEighty and alsoTenEighty refer to the same VideoMode instance."
```

Note that this is not the same as equality:

* “Identical to” means that two constants or variables of class type refer to exactly the same class instance.

* “Equal to” means that two instances are considered “equal” or “equivalent” in value, for some appropriate meaning of “equal”, as defined by the type’s designer.

It is up to whoever writes the class to define what two classes being 'equal' means. This is defined in the Equivalence Operators section.

## Pointers

In C, C++ and Objective-C, we use pointers to point to locations in memory. Swift references are similar, but do not point to an explicit memory location, so we do not need to use `*` and `&` operators to explicitly reference and dereference our variables.

[Previous Note](../7%20-%20Classes%20and%20Structures/7.2%20-%20Structures%20and%20Enumerations%20are%20Value%20Types.md) | [Back To Contents](https://github.com/Firanus/swift-language-guide-notes) |  [Next Note](../7%20-%20Classes%20and%20Structures/7.4%20-%20Choosing%20Between%20Classes%20and%20Structures.md)