# 12.1 [Closure Expressions](https://developer.apple.com/library/content/documentation/Swift/Conceptual/Swift_Programming_Language/Closures.html#//apple_ref/doc/uid/TP40014097-CH11-ID95)

Closure expressions are a way of writing short, function-like constructs without a full decleration and name. They are very similar to lambda expressions in JavaScript. In this note, we will assume a user has a basic understanding of this concept and explain appropriately. 

For a more detailed look, the [official language guide](https://developer.apple.com/library/content/documentation/Swift/Conceptual/Swift_Programming_Language/Closures.html#//apple_ref/doc/uid/TP40014097-CH11-ID95) provides a detailed step-by-step approach to introducing closures via a function for reversing names in an array. We will borrow their code snippets to show how to we can slim down a function.

## Closure Expression Syntax

The basic syntax of a closure expression is as follows:
```Swift
{(parameters) -> returnType in
  //statements
}
```

Closures allow most parameters. The only exceptions are:
* They do not allow default values
* Variadic parameters must be named

To display their power, let's assume we want to pass a closure to the the `sorted(by:)` method of an array, which specified how an array's item should be sorted.

If we were to write a regular function, it might look like:

```Swift
func backward(_ s1: String, _ s2: String) -> Bool {
    return s1 > s2
}
var reversedNames = names.sorted(by: backward)
// reversedNames is equal to ["Ewa", "Daniella", "Chris", "Barry", "Alex"]
```

In closure syntax this could be rewritten as:

```Swift
reversedNames = names.sorted(by: { (s1: String, s2: String) -> Bool in
    return s1 > s2
})
```

This is short enough that we can write it on a single line:

```Swift
reversedNames = names.sorted(by: { (s1: String, s2: String) -> Bool in return s1 > s2 } )
```

### Inferring Types From Context

In actual point of fact, because our closure is being passed to a function, Swift is actually able to infer the types being passed in and the return type. So we do not need to include the type information `(String, String) -> Bool`. This looks like:

```Swift
reversedNames = names.sorted(by: { s1, s2 in return s1 > s2 } )
```

Note that it is always possible to do this when passing a closure inline to a function or method. However, including the types is still encouraged in cases where it reduces ambiguity.

### Implicit Returns from Single Expression Clauses

If your closure includes a return statement as its only expression, you can actually omit the `return` keyword. (The same is true of Lambda expressions in JavaScript). So our example now looks like:


```Swift
reversedNames = names.sorted(by: { s1, s2 in s1 > s2 } )
```

### Shorthand Argument Names

Swift automatically provides shorthand argument names to inline closures. These can be used to refer to the closure's arguments using names like `$0`, `$1`, etc.

If you use these shorthand names, you can omit the argument list from the closure (and also, consequentially, the `in` keyword), as the number and type of expected arguments will be inferred from the expected function type. Our function has now become:

```Swift
reversedNames = names.sorted(by: { $0 > $1 } )
```

### Operator Methods

For this specific example, there's actually an even shorter way to write the closure expression above. The `String` type defines its own version of the greater than operator as taking two strings and returning a bool. Or `(String, String) -> Bool`. This is exactly what we need for this method. As a consequence, we can just use the operator method:

```Swift
reversedNames = names.sorted(by: >)
```

[Previous Note](../12%20-%20Closures/12.0%20-%20Closures.md) | [Back To Contents](https://github.com/Firanus/swift-language-guide-notes) |  [Next Note](../12%20-%20Closures/12.2%20-%20Trailing%20Closures.md)